Project-steam power plant.

In the steam power plant I, electrical energy and steam are produced in order to cover the demands
 of the total plant for electrical energy, high-pressure steam (steam reforming) and low-pressure steam

principal operation of steam power plant-
The Rankine cycle is an idealized thermodynamic cycle of heat engine.
 Under this cycle heat energy is converted into mechanical energy while undergoing phase change.

Woking of steam power plant-

In the steam power plant the pulverised coal is fed into the boiler and it is burnt in the furnace. 
The water present in the boiler drum changes to high pressure steam. 
From the boiler the high pressure steam passed to the superheater where it is again heated upto its dryness. 
This superheated steam strikes the turbine blades with high speed and the turbine starts rotating at high speed.
 A generator is attached to the rotor of the turbine and as the turbine rotates it also rotates with the speed of the turbine. 
The generator converts the mechanical energy of the turbine into electrical energy.
 After striking on the turbine the steam leaves the turbine and enters into the condenser. 
The steam gets condensed with the help of cold water from the cooling tower. 
The condensed water with the feed water enters into the economiser. 
In the economiser the feed water gets heated up before entering into the boiler. 
This heating of water increases the efficiency of the boiler.
 The exhaust gases from the furnace pass through the superheater, economiser and air pre-heater. 
The heat of this exhaust gases is utilised in the heating of steam in the superheater, feed water in the economiser and air in the air pre-heater. 
After burning of the coal into the furnace, it is transported to ash handling plant and finally to the ash storage.

The efficiancy of steam power plant-
The power plant that operates on coal constitutes almost 41% of the world’s electricity generation.
It is the modified Rankine thermodynamic cycle on which the coal-fired power plant operates.
The overall efficiency of the coal power plant ranges from 32% to 42%. And this is calculated by the superheat pressures and superheat and reheat temperatures of steam.
Most of the large power plants that operates at steam pressures of 170 bar,570 ? superheat and  570 ? reheat steam temperatures can achieve the efficiency ranges from 35% to 38%.
The efficiency of the super critical power plants operating at 220 bar steam pressure, 600/600 ? superheat/reheat temperatures can achieve is 42%.
The efficiency in the range of 45 to 48% can be achieved by the ultra-super critical power plants operating at 300 bar pressure, 600/600 ? superheat/reheat steam temperatures.

Advantages of steam power plant-
As compared with the power generating plant, it has a low initial cost and hence economical.
Less land area is required as compared with the hydro power plant.
Coal is used as fuel and the cost of coal is cheaper than petrol and diesel fuel. So the power generation cost is economical.
This power plant has easy maintenance cost.
Steam power plant can be installed in any area where water sources and transportation facility are easily available.

Disadvantages of Steam power plant-
High Running Cost: The running cost of the steam power plant is comparatively high because of fuel, maintenance, etc
Low Efficiency: If we talk about the overall efficiency of the steam power plant then it is about 35 % to 41% which is low.
Global Warming: Due to the release of burnt gases of coal or fuel, it contributes to global warming to a larger extent.
Adverse Effect on the aquatic living organism: The heated water that is thrown in the rivers, ponds etc puts and adverse effect on the living organism and disturbs the ecology.